---
title: "Are We There Yet?"
date: 2022-02-25
slug: are-we-there-yet
published: true
---

Are we there yet?  

When I was a kid, my siblings and I needed to find ways to entertain ourselves on
long car rides. We thought it was fun to "secretly plan" to ask my parents, in
unison, and in that particular sing-song way, "Are we there yet?". Of course, we
rarely were, and we knew that. And sure enough, the answer was always no. (More
specifically, the answer was usually an interval of time measured in episodes of
Bill Nye, the Science Guy, which somehow became the standard unit of measurement
for long car rides in our family.) <!-- endexcerpt -->

But what, you might ask, does that anecdote have to do with programming, web
development, freelance work, or literally anything else you might expect me to
write about here?

The truth is, when I left my job to start down this whole freelance path, I had
a vague sense of how long things might take. I didn't set myself any real hard
deadlines, and I made sure that I was financially set up to be patient. But as
with anything, *the best laid schemes o’ mice an’ men. Gang aft a-gley*. Errm.
Not quite sure what that last bit means. But the gist is clear. No matter how
well you think you've planned, something will go wrong.

Not that anything has gone particularly *wrong* with my experience so far. I've
actually been able to make more connections than I expected I'd be able to,
without going down paths like cold-emailing businesses or being able to go to
networking events in-person. I think, if you were to have asked me back in
November how long it would take me to get my first gig, my answer would've been
probably "A month or so of looking hard". Well, it's pretty much the end of
February and we aren't quite there yet.

Not to say I haven't been busy, or that I'm not optimistic. I've had lots of
productive, interesting conversations. I have a hunch that some of those
conversations may result in some work, even if they've gone dormant for the time
being. I'm allowing (forcing?) myself to be patient, and waiting for something
that makes sense. I'm also trying to spend some of my days improving my skills,
filling in gaps in my knowledge and experience that I've identified as
priorities.

The truth is, I've been getting a bit bored lately. A bit antsy. I had kinda
figured that by now, I'd be working. It's ok that I'm not, but it's also ok that
I wish that I were. This whole experience so far has been a bit of a roller-coaster,
but the important thing is, that's ok. I'm in this for the long haul. I don't
want to just try freelancing to say that I've done it. I want to see if this is
a sustainable lifestyle for me long-term. That's a big part of why I'm not
rushing into anything. It's why I'm being patient. It's why, ultimately, I'm ok
with being a bit bored right now. Learning to be comfortable with that boredom
and uncertainty is something that's going to take some getting used to.
Realistically though, if freelancing is something I want to do long-term, those
are feelings that I'm going to need to get used to.

So where does that leave us. I've had to adjust a few expectations that I'd had
for myself. One of the big things I'm trying to let go of is the idea that every
day has to be filled with ~8ish hours of "work". What does that even mean
anymore? Basically, nothing. I try to keep a routine, but I don't let myself
feel bad if, on a given day (or days), I don't have it in me to buckle down and
work. If I have a day where I'm not super productive, that's ok. The important
thing is that I build this sustainably. I don't want to push myself to the point
of burnout, or where I start to resent the routine.

This post has turned a little bit rambly, but I hope at least one of you might
be able to take something useful from it. As always, keep well, and don't
hesitate to reach out if anything resonates with you in particular!
