---
date: 2016-01-18
title: In the Beginning
published: true
slug: in-the-beginning
---

In the beginning…. There was a blog. Well, really, there wasn’t. It’s only just
now that there’s a blog. But now there is. I’ve made a blog for myself. I don’t
think I’ve ever had one before, and I never really envisioned this being
something that I’d do. But I figure it’s worthwhile to keep a bit of a record
about what’s going on at the moment. Maybe I’ll want to read it in the future?
Maybe you (if you’re actually reading this) will read it and find it interesting
or funny or depressing or some other adjective. Who knows. But that’s half the
fun.

Anyways. Here I am. Just started my second week at [Bitmaker
Labs](http://bitmakerlabs.com) Web Development Bootcamp. Having decided that
being a barista, while sweet in a lot of ways
(all-the-coffee-you-can-drink-kind-of-ways), wasn’t the challenge I wanted, I
sought out other opportunities. I kinda stumbled onto Bitmaker and the concept
of coding bootcamps by accident. I thought it’d be worthwhile to learn a bit
about coding and stuff (ya know, so that when the computers rise up I’ll at
least be able to communicate with them), and it got me thinking that maybe it’d
be a cool thing to pursue more seriously.

So I did my research. Lots of it. Visiting offices, emailing former students,
countless hours Googling — yes, dear reader, I did it all. I landed, finally, on
Bitmaker as my choice. After a rather intense week, I certainly think I’ve made
the right choice. But more on that soon.

So what’s a “web development bootcamp,” and why am I doing it? Baaaaasically,
it’s a 9-week,
super-full-time-intensive-all-day-all-night-all-weekend-learn-to-code-bonanza!
It’s more fun than it sounds. Seriously. Basically myself and 40-ish other
people of similar age and interest pack ourselves into a room for 40+ hours a
week and learn to code. It’s intense, it’s hard work, it’s unbelievably
frustrating at times, and it’s an absolute blast. The instructors are
knowledgeable, the facility is top-notch, my classmates are interesting,
motivated, and fun folks, and the successes are hugely rewarding. Today I spent
a long long long time trying to write a little program that would turn words
into pig-latin. When I finally figured out why it was turning *banana* into
*anabanay* instead of *ananabay* I may have squealed a little bit. There’s a bit
more to it than just pig-latin, but you get the picture.

For those who have made it this far (the brave, the few), I’ll touch briefly on
what we’ve learned so far. Day 1 (last Monday) was about navigating the computer
with the command line (you know, the scary black screen with white text and the
solid white rectangular cursor)(really it’s not so bad), and how to use software
called git, which works together with a website called
[github](http://github.com), to allow for sophisticated and efficient
collaboration on projects, as well as provide a backup of your own files. Days 2
and 3 were focused on the basics of [Ruby](http://ruby-lang.org), the language
we’ll be using throughout the course to build apps. Airbnb, Couchsurfing,
Bleacher Report, Bloomberg, FunnyOrDie, Goodreads, Hulu… all Ruby (and Rails,
which is a kind of add-on for Ruby that we’ll be learning about starting next
week, I think). Then Thursday and Friday were more Ruby, but using it to build
out slightly larger, more functional projects. The assignment for Friday was to
build a little address book app that runs on the command line. Definitely the
biggest project most of us had ever done, and appropriately difficult.

Today was an introduction to testing. Writing code to test your other code seems
a bit redundant sometimes, but it’s actually a super useful way to keep yourself
in check, especially when it comes to refactoring (editing) your code down the
line, or adding new features without breaking everything (surprisingly
difficult). This week we’ll start to touch on HTML and CSS (languages used to
actually build the websites themselves), as well as basic introductions to web
servers and databases, so that we’ll be able to host our apps online. It’s a bit
of a whirlwind, but it’s never dull.

So this was a bit longer than I anticipated, but it’s a first go-round at
something I’ve never really done, and I had a lot to catch up on (I meant to
start doing this a week ago). So if you made it this far, I appreciate it. If
you didn’t, well I guess you’ll never know how I feel about it. If you’re really
brave (or just mildly curious as to what coding actually looks like), you can
look at all the work I’ve been doing at
[github.com/bowmanmike](http://github.com/bowmanmike). I can’t really predict
right now how often I’ll write one of these, but I think once a week is a safe
bet for the moment. Thanks for reading, and may the force be with you.
