---
published: true
slug: the-end-of-an-era
date: 2016-03-24
title: The End of an Era
---

Alright. Let's see if I can remember how to write. It's been a few weeks since
I've typed anything that's not code, so I might be a bit rusty. Apologies in
advance, to those it may offend. Things are winding down here at Bitmaker. Well,
they are for me and my cohort, the affectionately-titled *TEAM GORT*. We had our
last day of class on the 11th of March, and we presented our final projects to
the world at large (or part of it, anyways.) So now we're set loose on the world
as mostly-fully-formed junior developers. Maybe not the most glamourous title,
but you gotta start somewhere.

So lets talk about final projects. Mine, as I may have mentioned, was called
*chortal*. Our original, working title was *Rmmts*, which as a team we became
quite attached to, but, as much as we liked it, it's a pretty terrible name for
a product. So we landed on *chortal*. It's kinda like a mix between chore and
portal, and it also sounds like a pokemon, so it's got some serious weight
behind it. For those not in the know, it's an online platform for roommates to
keep track of household goings-on. Chores, money, messaging, announcements, all
that kinda fun stuff. It can send email or SMS notifications to remind you to
take out the garbage every Wednesday, or to pay your rent once a month. You can
check it out [here](http://chortal.herokuapp.com), and if you're feeling like
being a bit of a beta tester/guinea pig, sign up and actually use the app. It
works, and you can for sure actually use it. It's mostly functional. I'm sure
it's full of bugs we haven't found yet, but the general features all seem to
work.

I worked with two people from my class, [Karen](http://karenjho.com/) and
[Patrick](https://twitter.com/patrickcruiks). We spent basically all our free
time in the last 3ish weeks on the project, and I think it shows. I'm really
pleased with how it all turned out, and how we all managed to work together. We
didn't have any giant merge conflicts, and every new feature we added seemed to
not break all the previous ones, which was often surprising. We had a lot of fun
on the project, and I think it'd be fun to see it actually be used by real
people. We haven't really had any conversations around working further on the
project, but it would be a shame to just put it away and never look at it again,
so we'll see what happens on that front.

This brings us to Tuesday night, the "Meet Your Makers" (get it?! because
bitMAKER). We were kinda guinea pigs in this situation, but I think things
worked out extremely well for everyone. Typically, the final project demo night
for each Bitmaker cohort has been a series of 15-minute presentations to a room
full of people. For our cohort, they decided to switch it to more of a
science-fair (though they insisted it was called a "Symposium") style. Each
group had a giant iMac on a table around the edge of the room where they set up
a little station. Demo the app, have your own laptop handy in case people want
to dig a little deeper into the code, have a stack of resumes and contact info
on hand, and hope people want to talk to you. I printed 15 resumes, and had a
bunch of my spiffy new business cards. I ended up giving out all my resumes, and
most of my cards as well too, so I guess it was a success.

No, it was definitely a success. Over the next 2 hours, people from various tech
companies in the city, some looking to hire, some not, circulated around the
room and chatted with everyone about their projects. It was tiring, but a great
chance for us to make contacts in the industry, and hopefully get a few
interviews set up. As I said, I gave out tons of resumes and cards, and managed
to snag a few cards myself. So now it's kinda up to me to touch base with these
folks and see what they're all about. Except for the fact that its "Hiring Week"
right now.

Hiring week? Sounds great, right? Yeah, it's pretty cool. Maaaaaaaybe a bit
optimistically-titled (I don't expect to get hired this week), but it gets the
point across. Bitmaker has a pretty solid reputation in the tech scene here in
Toronto. So they use those connections to try and put us fledgling devs in
contact with companies looking to hire people for junior-ish roles. They get in
contact with Bitmaker, and Bitmaker tries to match us students up with companies
that they think would be a good fit. As I write this, I'm waiting at Bitmaker
for my first interview, and I've got two more set up after this, one this
afternoon and one next week. Hopefully I'll be able to snag a few more before
the week's out. They're generally short, 15 or 30 minute chats, but it's a good
screening process for the companies. They get a sense of who we are, and they
get to decide if they want to pursue the interview process with us any further.

As I've learned recently, tech interviewing is a pretty serious process. It'll
generally start with a short "screener" interview, to see if you're a reasonable
person who can interact with other reasonable people. Then there'll usually be a
technical portion, where you'll be given a code challenge to either take home
and submit later, or work out on a whiteboard in front of some technical people
from the company. Some places will do another round of interviews afterwards,
and then finally decide whether or not they want to make a move. It's a pretty
intimidating process, especially for someone who's only really been coding for
10 weeks. It's great that Bitmaker puts this effort in for us, so that we get a
bit of low-stakes interview practice, and we can get our names out there in the
world.

I recognize that this post is getting pretty long, but bear with me! I'm into
the final section: What the hell am I gonna do with all my free time now?

I've got a few things in mind. Hiring week is gonna take some energy, and really
it's just the beginning of the job hunt. Bitmaker's gonna get me started, but
I've really gotta be on it for myself. Luckily, it seems like there's no
shortage of developer jobs to be had in the city, and thats before you even
count the possibility of freelance work, which can be quite lucrative, but a
totally different kind of challenge. So I'll be getting on that grind, which I'm
weirdly excited for.

It's also a pretty big change, to go from being forced to code for 8+ hours a
day, to having nothing on the go. It's definitely easy to get rusty, so I've
gotta find a way to keep my skills sharp. I've got a few little projects in mind
to keep myself busy and keep my skills sharp. There's a whole ton of new
technologies I want to explore a bit, and now's definitely the time. It'd be
good to be able to say to employers that I've got experience with Foundation, or
BackboneJS, or React, so I'll try and learn a bit about them in the next little
while, while the job hunt continues.

And that leaves one question. What, dear reader, will become of this blog? It
began as an attempt to chronicle my time here at Bitmaker. And it worked really
well when there was tons of new material coming at me every day. Things should
slow down a bit now, so it seems likely that the posts will slow down a bit. I
might start to shift things towards a more general blog, or maybe towards the
technical side. It might be cool to write a short post now and again about a new
technology I'm exploring, or something cool I've been working on at my
(currently hypothetical) new job. Or maybe a post about the pitfalls of the
Toronto rental housing market. Or maybe about the Leafs. Who knows. I think
that'll sort itself out on its own.

And with that, I'll sign off. Enjoy the long weekend, and may the force be with
you. Always.
